Integrate the tutorials from ESS (#41)
rism-digital/verovio-reference-book: _book/03-interactive-notation/01-css-and-svg.md

---
title: "CSS and SVG"
---

### Understanding the structure of the SVG

The SVG produced by Verovio can be manipulated further. In this tutorial, you are going to use CSS to highlight some content of the output.

One key feature of Verovio is that it preserves the structure of the MEI in the SVG output. For example, a chord with two notes encoded in MEI:

```xml
<chord xml:id="c1">
  <note/>
  <note/>
</chord>
```

will have a the following structure in the SVG:

```xml
<g class="chord" id="c1">
  <g class="note"/>
  <g class="note"/>
</g>
```

> You will notice that not only the tree structure is preserved, but also that MEI element names are passed as `@class` attribute values in the SVG elements, as well as the `@xml:id` of the MEI element as `@id` in the SVG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice that both the tree structure is preserved and that the MEI element names are passed as `@class` attribute values in the SVG elements, as well as the `@xml:id` of the MEI element as `@id` in the SVG.
```

> Thanks to this, and because SVG can be styled with CSS, it is straightforward to modify the appearance of elements and their content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since SVG can be styled with CSS, it is straightforward to modify the appearance of elements and their contents.
```

Modifying the appearance can be done with a CSS file, or programmatically.

### Applying CSS to the SVG

> In the CSS file you need to create rules to be applied to the SVG `<g>` elements - simply `g` in CSS - together with the class selector corresponding to the MEI element name. For example, `g.tempo` to modifying MEI `<tempo>` elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the CSS file you need to create rules to be applied to the SVG `<g>` elements - simply `g` in CSS - together with the class selector corresponding to the MEI element name. For example, `g.tempo` modifies MEI `<tempo>` elements.
```

```
{
  animation-name: pulse;
  animation-duration: 1.0s;
  animation-iteration-count: infinite;
}

@keyframes pulse {
  0%   { fill: orange; }
  50%  { fill: brown; }
  100% { fill: orange; }
}
```

CSS can also be used to change the opacity of an element. The opacity value can range from 0.0 (transparent) to 1.0 (normal default value).

### Adjusting the style programmatically

In applications, it is often useful to modify the CSS programmatically, for example in response to some user interactions.

To do so, elements can be accessed by element and class name in the same way as with CSS. For example, for retrieving all rests, you can do:

```js
let rests = document.querySelectorAll('g.rest');
```

You can then loop through the list of rests with:

```js
for (let rest of rests) {
    // you have now access to the rest one by one and can modify their style
}
```

To modify the style of an element, you can assign the desired value to the corresponding key. For example, in order to change the color (fill) or a rest (element), you need to do:

```js
rest.style.fill = "dodgerblue";
```

#### Using custom data-* attributes

> The attributes in the SVG `<g>` elements corresponding to the MEI elements is not limited to the `@class` carrying the MEI element name and the MEI `@xml:id` passed as `@id`. Verovio also passed MEI `@type` values as additional `@class` in the SVG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The attributes in the SVG `<g>` elements corresponding to the MEI elements is not limited to the `@class` carrying the MEI element name and the MEI `@xml:id` passed as `@id`. Verovio also produces MEI `@type` values as additional `@class` in the SVG.
```

Author: I meant "passes". The `@type` is not produced. "converts" ?

> However, in many cases, applications need to have access at other attribute values. To do so, one can use the `svgAdditionalAttribute` option to specify which attributes needs to be made available directly in the SVG output. For example, for making the note pitch name and the note octave accessible, you will need to add the following option value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in many cases, applications need to have access at other attribute values. To do so, one can use the `svgAdditionalAttribute` option to specify which attributes can be made available in the SVG output. For example, for making the note pitch name and the note octave accessible, you can add the following option value:
```

```json
{
  svgAdditionalAttribute: ["note@pname", "note@oct"]
}
```

> With this option, each `g.note` element in the SVG will also have a `data-pname` and a `data-oct` attritute carrying the original MEI attribute value. For example, and note in MEI and the corresponding SVG element will be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this option, each `g.note` element in the SVG will also have a `data-pname` and a `data-oct` attribute carrying the original MEI attribute value. For example, a note in MEI and the corresponding SVG element will be:
```
